
==========
pure-audio
==========

This is a digital audio interface for the Pure programming language. It
currently includes the following modules:

* audio.pure: A PortAudio wrapper which gives you portable access to realtime
  audio input and output on a variety of different host APIs. This uses the
  well-known PortAudio library by Ross Bencina, Phil Burk et al, see
  http://www.portaudio.com/.

* sndfile.pure: Reading and writing audio files in various formats. This is a
  fairly straightforward wrapper for Erik de Castro Lopo's excellent
  libsndfile library, see http://www.mega-nerd.com/libsndfile/.

TODO: We still need to add a libsamplerate module, so that we can play back
audio files at the proper speed when the samplerate does not match the device
settings.

Documentation still needs to be written, so for the time being please read the
source modules listed above and have a look at the examples provided in the
distribution.

Installation
------------

You need to have both libportaudio (v19) and libsndfile (1.x) installed on
your system. Any fairly recent version of these libraries should do.

If you need to regenerate the wrappers ('make generate' does this), you'll
also need the corresponding header files, portaudio.h and snfile.h (and
pure-gen, of course). You'll probably have to do this on 32 bit systems, as
the wrappers included in the distribution were created on a 64 bit system. In
this case, check the includedir variables defined in the Makefiles, these need
to point to the directory where the header files are to be found.

However, normally you just need to run 'make' to compile the package. If
you're lucky and everything compiles smoothly, you can install with 'sudo make
install'.

If you're not so lucky, you can get help on the Pure mailing list, see
http://groups.google.com/group/pure-lang.

NOTE: You may also want to install the related pure-midi package. In
particular, pure-midi also provides realtime.pure, a little utility module
which gives Pure programs access to realtime scheduling (you almost surely
need this for low-latency realtime audio work).

License
-------

pure-audio is Copyright (c) 2010 by Albert Graef, licensed under the 3-clause
BSD license, see the COPYING file for details.

Please note that if you're using these modules, you're also bound by the
license terms of the PortAudio and libsndfile libraries they are based on, see
the corresponding sources and websites for details.


Enjoy! :)

Albert Graef <Dr.Graef@t-online.de>
