
=========
pure-midi
=========

This is a MIDI interface for the Pure programming language. It includes the
following modules:

* midi.pure: A PortMidi/PortTime wrapper which gives you portable access to
  realtime MIDI input and output. This uses PortMidi (by Roger B. Dannenberg
  et al) from the PortMedia project, see http://portmedia.sourceforge.net/.

* midifile.pure: Reading and writing standard MIDI files. This is based on
  David G. Slomin's light-weight midifile library, which comes bundled with
  the pure-midi sources.

* realtime.pure: A little utility module, provides access to realtime
  scheduling to applications which need it, on systems which have the required
  functionality in the POSIX threads library (Linux, OSX and Windows should
  all be fine).

Documentation still needs to be written, so for the time being please read the
source modules listed above and have a look at the examples provided in the
distribution.

To use this library, you'll need Pure, as well as the pure-ffi module. You can
get this at http://pure-lang.googlecode.com/.

You also need to have PortMidi installed (as a shared library). This release
was tested with PortMidi 2.00, if you have to use some other version then you
may have to fiddle with portmidi.pure and/or midi.pure to make it work. (If
you're running into 64 bit compilation problems then you may have to go with
the latest PortMidi from svn instead. At least it worked for me, YMMV.)

Then, as usual, run 'make'. If you're lucky and everything compiles properly,
you can install with 'sudo make install'. Loading midi.pure in Pure and
running the examples shouldn't give you any errors. (If it does then your
PortMidi version might be incompatible with pure-midi and you'll probably have
to regenerate portmidi.pure using 'make generate'. See the toplevel Makefile
for details.)

If you're not so lucky, you might be able to get help on the Pure mailing
list, see http://groups.google.com/group/pure-lang.

License
-------

pure-midi is Copyright (c) 2010 by Albert Graef, licensed under the 3-clause
BSD license, see the COPYING file for details.

For convenience, I've bundled some (BSD-licensed or compatible) source files
from other packages with this release. portmidi.h and porttime.h are from
PortMidi (http://portmedia.sourceforge.net/) which is

Copyright (c) 1999-2000 Ross Bencina and Phil Burk
Copyright (c) 2001-2006 Roger B. Dannenberg

midifile.c and midifile.h in the midifile subdirectory are from "Div's midi
utilities" (http://public.sreal.com:8000/~div/midi-utilities/) which is

Copyright (c) 2003-2006 David G. Slomin

Please see portmidi.h and midifile.h for the pertaining copyrights and license
conditions.


Enjoy! :)

Albert Graef <Dr.Graef@t-online.de>
