==================
Pure GTK+ Bindings
==================

Albert Graef <Dr.Graef@t-online.de>

pure-gtk is a collection of bindings to use the GTK+ GUI toolkit version 2.x
with Pure, see http://www.gtk.org. The bindings include the gtk (+gdk),
glib, atk, cairo and pango libraries, each in their own Pure module.

At present these are just straight 1-1 wrappers of the C libraries, created
with pure-gen. So they still lack some convenience, but they are perfectly
usable already, and a higher-level API for accessing all the functionality
will hopefully become available in time. In fact *you* can help make that
happen. :) So please let me know if you'd like to give a helping hand in
improving pure-gtk.

Copying
=======

Copyright (c) 2008, 2009 by Albert Graef.

pure-gtk is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the
terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any
later version.

pure-gtk is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY
WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR
A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU Lesser General Public License for more
details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public License along
with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

Installation
============

To install, do the usual ``make && sudo make install`` (see the Makefile for
further options). This needs Pure and the GTK header files and libraries.

This release was prepared with GTK+ 2.14.4 on SUSE 11.1. If you're seeing a
lot of warnings or even compilation errors when running ``make``, your GTK
headers are probably much different from these. In that case you should run
``make generate`` to regenerate the bindings; for this you also need to have
pure-gen installed. (If you already have pure-gen then it's a good idea to do
this anyway.)

Usage
=====

See examples/hello.pure for a basic example. The files uiexample.pure and
uiexample.glade show how to run a GUI created with the Glade-3 interface
builder. This needs a recent version of the GtkBuilder API to work. (If you're
still running Glade-2 and an older GTK+ version, you might want to use the
older libglade interface instead. Support for that is in the Makefile, but
it's not enabled by default.) NOTE: The examples start up much faster when
they are compiled to native executables. To do this, just run ``make
examples`` after ``make``. (Be patient, this takes a while.)

pure-gtk can be discussed on the Pure mailing list at:
http://groups.google.com/group/pure-lang
