
===========
pure-octave
===========

.. default-domain:: pure
.. module:: octave

Version @version@, |today|

Albert Graef <Dr.Graef@t-online.de>

A Pure interface to `GNU Octave`_.

.. _GNU Octave: http://www.octave.org

.. contents::
.. sectnum::

Introduction
============

This is an Octave module for the Pure programming language, based on Paul
Kienzle's octave_embed_ which allows Octave to be embedded in other languages.
It allows you to execute arbitrary Octave commands and Octave functions from
Pure.

.. _octave_embed: http://wiki.octave.org/wiki.pl?OctaveEmbedded

Copying
=======

pure-octave is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later
version.

pure-octave is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY
WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR
A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Please see the accompanying COPYING file for the precise license terms. The
GPL can also be read online at http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.

Installation
============

Get the latest source from
http://pure-lang.googlecode.com/files/pure-octave-@version@.tar.gz.

Run ``make`` to compile the module and ``make install`` (as root) to install
it in the Pure library directory. This requires GNU make, and of course you
need to have both Pure and Octave installed (including Octave's ``mkoctfile``
utility and the corresponding header files and libraries).

``make`` tries to guess your Pure installation directory and platform-specific
setup. If it gets this wrong, you can set some variables manually. In
particular, ``make install prefix=/usr`` sets the installation prefix. Please
see the Makefile for details.

NOTE: This release of pure-octave has been tested with Octave 3.4.0 and Octave
3.6.2. Older versions might require some fiddling with the sources to get the
embedded Octave interface working.

Basic Usage
===========

Import this module into your Pure scripts as follows::

  using octave;

This will add an embedded instance of the Octave interpreter to your program.
(You can import this module as often as you want, but there's always only one
instance of Octave in each process.)

.. function:: octave_eval s

   Executes arbitrary Octave code.

::

  > octave_eval "eig([1 2;3 4])";
  ans =

    -0.37228
     5.37228

  0

This prints the result on stdout and returns a result code (zero if everything
went fine). To suppress the printing of the result, simply terminate the
Octave statement with a semicolon::

  > octave_eval "eig([1 2;3 4]);";
  0

.. function:: octave_set var val
   	      octave_get var

   Set and get global variables in the Octave interpreter.

This allows you to define values to be used when evaluating Octave code, and
to transfer results back to Pure. However, before such globals can be accessed
in Octave, you must explicitly declare them as globals::

  > octave_eval "global x y ans";
  0

Now you can use :func:`octave_set` and :func:`octave_get` to transfer values
between Pure and Octave as follows::

  > octave_set "x" {1.0,2.0;3.0,4.0};
  {1.0,2.0;3.0,4.0}
  > octave_eval "eig(x);";
  0
  > octave_get "ans";
  {-0.372281323269014;5.37228132326901}

Note that the most recent result can always be accessed through Octave's
``ans`` variable. You can also use an explicit variable definition as
follows::

  > octave_eval "y = eig(x);";
  0
  > octave_get "y";
  {-0.372281323269014;5.37228132326901}

Direct Function Calls
=====================

.. function:: octave_call fun n args

   Call an octave function in a direct fashion. ``fun`` denotes the name of
   the function, ``n`` the number of function results and ``args`` the
   function arguments.

::

  > let x = {1.0,2.0;3.0,4.0};
  > octave_call "eig" 1 x;
  {-0.372281323269014;5.37228132326901}

Note the second argument, which denotes the desired number of *return*
values. This will usually be 1 (or 0 if you don't care about the result), but
some Octave functions may return a variable number of results, depending on
how they're called. Multiple values are returned as tuples in Pure::

  > octave_call "eig" 2 x;
  {-0.824564840132394,-0.415973557919284;0.565767464968992,-0.909376709132124},
  {-0.372281323269014,0.0;0.0,5.37228132326901}

Multiple *arguments* are also specified as a tuple::

  > octave_call "norm" 1 (x, 2);
  5.46498570421904
  > octave_call "norm" 1 (x, 1);
  6.0

Instead of a function name, you can also specify the function to be called
using a special kind of Octave object, a function value. These are returned,
e.g., by Octave's ``str2func`` and ``inline`` builtins. For your convenience,
pure-octave provides a frontend to these builtins, the :func:`octave_func`
function, which lets you specify an Octave function in one of two ways:

.. function:: octave_func /name name

   Returns the Octave function with the given name. This works like Octave's
   ``str2func`` builtin.

.. function:: octave_func /expr expr

   Returns an "inline" function, where ``expr`` is an Octave expression (as a
   string) describing the function value. This works like Octave's ``inline``
   builtin. Instead of just an Octave expression, you can also specify a tuple
   consisting of the inline expression and the parameter names. (Otherwise the
   parameters are determined automatically, see the description of the
   ``inline`` function in the Octave manual for details.)

Note that inline functions allow you to call stuff that is not an Octave
function and hence cannot be specified directly in :func:`octave_call`, such
as an operator. Examples::

  > let eig = octave_func "eig";
  > let mul = octave_func "x*y";
  > octave_call eig 1 (octave_call mul 1 (x,x));
  {0.138593383654928;28.8614066163451}
  > let add = octave_func ("x+y","x","y");
  > octave_call add 1 (x,x);
  {2.0,4.0;6.0,8.0}

Data Conversions
================

As shown above, the :func:`octave_set`, :func:`octave_get` and
:func:`octave_call` functions convert Pure data to corresponding Octave values
and vice versa.  Octave scalars and matrices of boolean, integer, double,
complex and character data are all supported by this interface, and are mapped
to the corresponding Pure data types in a straightforward manner (scalars to
scalars, matrices to matrices and strings to strings). Note that in any case
these conversions create *copies* of the data, so modifying, say, an Octave
matrix received via :func:`octave_get` in Pure only affects the Pure copy of
the matrix and leaves the original Octave matrix unchanged.

Any other kind of Octave object (including Octave function objects, see
`Direct Function Calls`_) is just passed through as is, in the form of a
cooked pointer to an Octave value which frees itself when garbage-collected.
You can check for such objects with the :func:`octave_valuep` predicate:

.. function:: octave_valuep x

   Check for Octave value pointers.

::

  > let eig = octave_func "eig";
  > eig; octave_valuep eig;
  #<pointer 0x230dba0>
  1

Such Octave value pointers can be used freely whereever an Octave value is
needed (i.e., in invocations of :func:`octave_set` and :func:`octave_call`).

You should also note the following:

* Octave's cell arrays and structures are not supported at this time, so they
  will show up as opaque Octave value pointers in Pure land. This allows these
  objects to be passed around freely, but you can't inspect or modify them in
  Pure.

* Scalars and 1x1 matrices are indistinguishable in Octave, thus any 1x1
  matrix will be returned as a scalar from Octave to Pure.

* All types of boolean and integer matrices are returned from Octave to Pure
  as (machine) integer matrices. When converted back to Octave, these all
  become Octave ``int32`` matrices, but you can easily convert them to boolean
  or other types of matrices in Octave as needed. For instance::

    > octave_set "a" {1,2;3,4};
    {1,2;3,4}
    > octave_eval "global a ans";
    0
    > octave_eval "eig(a)";
    error: eig: wrong type argument `int32 matrix'
    1
    > octave_eval "eig(double(a))";
    ans =

      -0.37228
       5.37228

    0
    > octave_eval "a>2";
    ans =

       0   0
       1   1

    0
    > octave_get "ans";
    {0,0;1,1}

* Octave strings are mapped to Pure strings, and character matrices with more
  than one row are mapped to (symbolic) column vectors of Pure strings.
  Example::

    > octave_set "a" "Hello, world!";
    "Hello, world!"
    > octave_eval "a";
    a = Hello, world!
    0
    > octave_eval "[a;'abc']";
    ans =

    Hello, world!
    abc          

    0
    > octave_get "ans";
    {"Hello, world!";"abc          "}

Calling Back Into Pure
======================

The embedded Octave interpreter provides one special builtin, the
``pure_call`` function which can be used to call any function defined in the
executing Pure script from Octave. For instance::

  > even m::matrix = {~(int x mod 2) | x=m};
  > octave_eval "pure_call('even', 1:12)";
  ans =

    0  1  0  1  0  1  0  1  0  1  0  1

  0

Here's the description of the ``pure_call`` function, as it is printed with
Octave's ``help`` command:

.. code-block:: none

  `pure_call' is a built-in function

    RES = pure_call(NAME, ARG, ...)
    [RES, ...] = pure_call(NAME, ARG, ...)

    Execute the Pure function named NAME (a string) with the given arguments.
    The Pure function may return multiple results as a tuple. Example:
    pure_call('succ', 99) => 100.

Gnuplot Interface
=================

Octave has a fairly comprehensive plotting interface based on Gnuplot. To make
the plotting capabilities available in a convenient form in Pure, the
distribution includes an additional gnuplot.pure module which provides simple
wrappers of the most important plotting functions. Please check gnuplot.pure
for details.

Caveats and Notes
=================

Directly embedding Octave in Pure programs is convenient because it allows
easy exchange of data between Pure and Octave, and you can also call Octave
functions directly from Pure and vice versa. However, it also comes at a
cost. A default build of Octave pulls in quite a few dependencies of its own
which might conflict with other modules loaded in a Pure script. Specifically,
we have found that older Octave versions may give problems with third-party
graphics libraries such as VTK_, if used in the same program as Octave. (These
seem to be fixed in the latest Octave and VTK versions, however.)

.. _VTK: http://www.vtk.org/
