
==============================================
Computer Algebra with Pure: A Reduce Interface
==============================================

.. default-domain:: pure
.. module:: reduce

Version @version@, |today|

| Albert Graef <Dr.Graef@t-online.de>
| Kurt Pagani <kp@scios.ch>

One of Pure's distinguishing features as a term rewriting programming language
is that it makes the symbolic manipulation of expressions very easy and
convenient. It is thus a natural environment for hosting a full-featured
computer algebra system (CAS). Computer algebra systems are complex pieces of
software featuring advanced algorithms for simplification of algebraic
expressions, symbolic integration, equation solving and much more.
Reimplementing all these algorithms in Pure would be a major undertaking, to
say the least. A much better option is to interface to an existing CAS which
has already proven its worth to the scientific computing community, has been
tested extensively and is known to be both reliable and efficient.

This is also the approach taken by Pure's :mod:`reduce` module which
interfaces to the well-known Reduce_ system. Reduce is the second-oldest
computer algebra system (the oldest one being Macsyma/`Maxima`_) which is
widely recognized as a state-of-the-art, powerful and efficient CAS. It is
free/open source software distributed under a BSD-style license_, actively
maintained on its SourceForge_ website, and implementations exist for all
major computing platforms. The :mod:`reduce` module makes the functionality of
Reduce available in Pure in a seamless way. It uses an "embedded" version of
Reduce in the form of a shared library which is easy to build from the Reduce
sources; the Installation_ section below describes how to do this. More
background information and a discussion of the interface can be found in the
`Embedding REDUCE`_ thread on the Pure mailing list.

.. _Reduce: http://reduce-algebra.sourceforge.net/
.. _Maxima: http://maxima.sourceforge.net/
.. _SourceForge: http://sourceforge.net/projects/reduce-algebra/
.. _license: http://reduce-algebra.svn.sourceforge.net/viewvc/reduce-algebra/trunk/README
.. _Embedding REDUCE: http://groups.google.com/group/pure-lang/browse_thread/thread/c11e82ca2e9e8cbb

The interface can be found in the reduce.pure module. It has two parts, a
`low-level interface`_ which consists of a handful of C entry points supplied
by the Reduce library, and a `high-level interface`_ which provides everything
that the Pure programmer needs to use Reduce from Pure. Please note that at
present this module is still experimental. But the basic functionality works,
and you're welcome to discuss the new interface on the mailing list and/or
submit bug reports and patches.

Installation
============

Get the latest source from
http://pure-lang.googlecode.com/files/pure-reduce-@version@.tar.gz.

You'll need both the Reduce library (named reduce.so, reduce.dylib or
reduce.dll, depending on the system you have) and a Reduce image file
(reduce.img) to make this module work. A Makefile is included with this
package so that you can build these yourself from the Reduce sources. (In
principle, this only needs to be done once for the initial installation of
this module, but you may want to repeat this procedure every once in a while
to get the latest Reduce version.)

You can check out the latest Reduce version from its svn repository with the
following command:

.. code-block:: console

   svn co https://reduce-algebra.svn.sourceforge.net/svnroot/reduce-algebra/trunk/ reduce-algebra

This may take a while; Reduce is a *big* package. Once it's finished, just
drop the resulting reduce-algebra directory into the pure-reduce source
directory. Run ``make`` and then (if needed) ``make install`` in the
pure-reduce directory (*not* in the reduce-algebra directory!). You should
also run ``make check`` which performs a few tests in order to verify that the
interface works ok (this can be done without installing the package, but needs
the Reduce image and library).

In case the above procedure doesn't work for you, there are more detailed
instructions on how to compile the relevant parts of Reduce in the
pure_reduce.txt file included in the distribution. Also note that the
pure-reduce module requires neither a full Reduce installation nor a full
build of the Reduce package; just the Reduce library and image. Thus the
additional items discussed below are all completely optional.

For convenience, the Makefile also has a ``make reduce`` target which builds a
minimal Reduce executable. If you use that option, ``make install`` installs
this executable along with the library and image files, so that you can then
run Reduce directly from the command line by just typing ``reduce``. Please
note that this is a really minimalistic Reduce frontend. It's small, easy to
build and doesn't need any support files other than the image file, but it
doesn't have any of the bells and whistles of the full Reduce version either.

If you want to install the full Reduce version, there are binary packages for
various systems available on SourceForge_. You can also build Reduce yourself
from the sources; please check the build instructions in the reduce-algebra
folder for details. (Basically, you'll need to run ``./configure --with-csl``
or ``./configure --with-psl`` and then ``make`` there. Be patient, this takes
a while.)

